# Netheril
Netheril was one of the ancient human empires of Faerûn. It was a magocracy, a form of government where only those with ability in magic had a voice in government. Netheril was also the home of the most powerful wizard who ever walked on Faerûn, Karsus. The Netherese also created powerful artifacts known as mythallars, which allowed mundane objects to become magical, dramatically changing the face of the Netherese Empire. This empire of human wizards, cities that floated across the sky and a terrible, terrible arrogance that nearly stripped Toril of its magic forever.

### Overview

Netheril’s history began nearly 5,000 years ago at the site of seven fishing villages, which decided to band together for mutual protection against marauding orc bands. The coalition of villages was named Seventon, creating a new nation. A few years later, however, King Nether renamed the kingdom Netheril‚ which meant Nether’s Land. 

Fourteen years later elves approached the loosely tied villages. Until this time, elves were a mere myth—imaginary creatures and Netheril bowed its head in awe. It took several years for the elves to convince these scarcely civilized humans that they were mortals, and they began trading. One of the many things the elves traded was magic. Over the next century magic use in this small nation grew in leaps and boundsand the importance placed on magic helped bring Netheril to the top of Toril’s magical nations.

Nether Scrolls was the name for a certain set of 50 scrolls that dealt with fundamental magic theory. The content was written over 50 scrolls divided in five chapters, each consisting of ten scrolls. Each scroll was made of precious metal, gold or platinum, made flexible like paper with silvery letters floating upon the surface. The nether scrolls were among the most influential artifacts in Faerûn. In fact, a good portion of the sum of magical knowledge on Toril was based on the theory described in these scrolls. After the discovery of the Nether Scrolls, the arcane might of Netheril increased immeasurably.

One of the greatest human archwizards to ever grace the lands of Toril—quite possibly the longest-lived creature known—was Ioulaum, the man who invented a mythallar. A mythallar was a Netherese device that dug deep into the weave of magic and allowed access to vast amounts of raw magic. This magical device looked much like a crystal ball but was about 150 feet in diameter. It allowed Netherese arcanists to create quasi-magical items without need of a permanency spell as long as it stayed within the one-mile-radius effect of the mythallar. The mythallar also provided the constant magical force that allowed entire mountains to hover in the air.




It can be said that the empire of Netheril was the oldest surviving human empire, and as such it is not surprising that it passed through several different phases. The First Age was the founding and settling of the Netheril region by humans, and of their contact with elves who taught them magic. This was followed by the Nether Age, so-called for the Nether Scrolls (Nether Scrolls was the name for a certain set of 50 scrolls that dealt with fundamental magic theory.) that the Netherese people used to rapidly increase their knowledge of magic. Undoubtedly the peak of their power, this was a time when the Netherese were breaking new ground, both in advances in magical pursuits but also in exploration into other planes. During this age lived Karsus, a wizard of immense power who could cast 12th level spelss and sought to seize the power of the gods. Indeed, it was his folly that led to the next age, the Fall of the Empire. Broken and shattered, it took the Netherese people a while to regroup, but eventually came the most recent age, the Re-Emergence of the Empire.

### The Fall of the Empire

Netheril was destroyed by Karsus's Folly: an attempt to steal the power of Mystryl, goddess of magic. She sacrificed herself in a last ditch effort to save Faerûn and was replaced by Mystra. When this happened, all magic ceased to exist for a time. Since Netherese cities floated above the surface, when magic ceased to exist there was nothing to hold the cities up. Netheril was almost completely obliterated in one fell swoop. The remnants of Netheril were then targeted by the phaerimm, who would have destroyed them and the rest of Faerûn had it not been for the intervention of the Sharn.

### Re-Emergence of the Empire

Three Netherese successor states (Asram, Anauria, and Hlondath) survived for a while, but all were eventually destroyed by the encroaching desert. Some Netherese culture survived in the country of Halruaa in the Shining South, which was founded by Raumark, a Netherese wizard who led a group of refugees south after foreseeing the destruction of the empire. However, the nation of Halruaa was almost completely wiped out during the Spellplague, and the area became one of the largest remaining areas of spellplague.

Additionally, just before the time of Karsus's Folly, one of the floating Netherese cities, Thultanthar, moved to the shadow plane. During their time in the shadow plane, many of the denizens were affected by their environment and became shades. The Shade Enclave returned to Faerûn with the help of the Evereskan elf Galaeron Nihmedu shortly before the Spellplague struck.